# VHDL Concurrency, Finite State Machines, and Hardware Synthesis
## Understanding Concurrent Processes, FSM Design, and RTL Implementation in VHDL

In VHDL code, when you have more than one process, they are executed concurrently, not sequentially. Concurrency means they run seemingly at the same time, in parallel.

The architecture section of VHDL code is concurrent. Inside the architecture, you can have process blocks, for example, an AND gate. This AND gate doesn't run sequentially. It just happens concurrently. If you put a process block inside the architecture it lives in that concurrent environment. The sensitivity list contains the trigger for that process block to be executed. It will trigger when one of the signals in the sensitivity list changes.

If you want to generate signal $D$ where $D \le (A \text{ AND } B)$, then you have to include signal $A$ and signal $B$ in the sensitivity list.

```vhdl
L1 : PROCESS (A,B)
BEGIN
    D <= (A AND B);
END PROCESS;
```

`L2: PROCESS (all)` declares a process that reacts to all possible signals within the entity.

```vhdl
L2 : PROCESS (all)
BEGIN
    E <= (B XOR C);
END PROCESS;
```

`L1` must include signal $B$ and $A$ in the process list, making the process list sensitive, which creates concurrent logic. As `L2` includes the keyword ‘all’ and will not be triggered, and also includes `Wait on`, it cannot be said that both `L1` and `L2` will have the same result.

You cannot declare signals inside a process, but variables, constants, and components can be declared. Signal declarations, which define the interface and internal connections of a design, typically occur outside of processes, within the architecture's declarative part, to establish the overall structure of the circuit. You can use either a sensitivity list OR a wait statement to create the trigger for your process to start; they are not equivalent and should not both be used.

Variabelen, constanten en componenten kunnen in een process block worden gedeclareerd en toegevoegd. Signalen zijn het enige type dat je niet in een process block kunt declareren.

Deze les gaat over Finite State Machines (FSM's). Een FSM is een concept dat kan worden gebruikt voor het ordenen en werken met logica. Het principe van FSM's is platformonafhankelijk, waardoor het in hardware kan worden gebruikt. Het helpt bij het ontwerp vanuit een high-level perspectief, waarbij je je geen zorgen hoeft te maken over de hardware-implementatie. Die zorg draag je over aan de compiler. Je geeft simpelweg aan dat je een FSM wil hebben, waarna de compiler het werk doet.

Een FSM wordt vaak weergegeven met een UML State Diagram. Dit diagram begint met een startpunt (initial state), van waaruit de machine naar een eerste state gaat. In elke state heb je de state naam en de activiteiten die in die state worden uitgevoerd. Er is een event or transition van de ene state naar de andere, en een conditie waaraan voldaan moet worden om die state change toe te staan.

In dit voorbeelddiagram zijn drie states te zien: State_1, State_2, en State_3. Als aan `Condition 1 == true` wordt voldaan, vindt er een event plaats van State_1 naar State_2. Als aan `Condition 2 == true` wordt voldaan, vindt er een event plaats van State_2 naar State_3. In het voorbeeld hier is geen conditie vereist om van State_3 weer terug naar State_1 te gaan. Dit onderdeel is een Composite State met activiteit. Een Composite State is samengestelde toestand met een activiteit. Dit betekent dat State 3 na zijn activiteit wordt meteen naar state 1 teruggestuurd, omdat er hier geen conditie is. Let op dat er geen *exit* state op het plaatje staat. Die is er dus ook niet, alleen de *power off* zou een soort van uitgang zijn.

Er zijn twee soorten FSM's: Mealy FSM's en Moore machines. De output van een Mealy FSM is afhankelijk van zowel de huidige state als de inputs. De output van een Moore machine hangt alleen af van de huidige state, niet van de inputs. Moore machines worden gebruikt in VHDL (VHSIC Hardware Description Language).

Bij implementatie van een Moore machine met VHDL gebruikt men typisch drie process blocks: een "next state" process, een "current state" process, en een "output" process. Het "next state" process neemt de huidige state en input als invoer en bepaalt wat de volgende state wordt. Het "current state" process registreert de huidige state. Het "output" process genereert de output, op basis van de huidige state. Een reset is hier een asynchrone reset.

In finite state machine design, output decoders are used. When designing a finite state machine, you can create three process blocks: an input decoder, a state decoder, and an output decoder. The output decoder uses the current state to determine the output. This can be implemented in concurrent code. It’s essentially a multiplexer based on the state machine.
If you implement your state machine correctly, you can use an RTL (Register Transfer Level) viewer to examine the generated hardware code. If the VHDL compiler understands the state machine design you want, it produces the functional code. An RTL viewer helps visualize the functional code of the state machine. It provides a sign that you have successfully implemented a state machine. In other words, the functional code, after passing through a Netlist Viewer and then the RTL Viewer is a sign that the VHDL compiler understands what you are trying to produce and generates the circuit you desire.
The Netlist Viewer also has a state machine viewer which represents the states and transitions. While not a UML diagram, it shows the states and transitions between them. Quartus provides this state machine viewer. You can see that this is not a UML diagram; however, you can identify the states and transitions. You can also see conditions for transitions are not indicated by circles, but there's a table that describes the condition for each transition. With this, you can verify your state machine works as expected and that it does what it's supposed to do.
A Quartus project can be downloaded from Gitlab to work with state machines. This working code can be used as a template for your state machine projects. When building state machines, you need to build two of them. The first handles the constant key, and the other addresses frequency. Remember the differences between concurrent and sequential logic. Concurrent logic has a delay between input and output because of propagation delay and sequential logic operates based on the “if this, then that” principle with changes acted upon when in a “watchlist”. Concurrent logic's behavior is described in a logical way, such as $C = A \text{ AND } B$, where C changes on all input ports being acted upon. However, with sequential logic, changes on the inputs are acted upon only when in the 'watchlist'. When synthesizing code, there are differences between concurrent and sequential logic in the VHDL language; for instance, 'WHEN ELSE' in concurrent corresponds to 'IF THEN ELSIF' in sequential. The 'WITH SELECT' construct is similar to a multiplexer where an output (OUT) is switched to port A, B, C, or D depending on what the value of the selector signal (SEL) is. That is equal to the CASE statement choices that must cover all possible values of the expression in sequential code. A four-port multiplexer has four inputs, one output, and one selector. When generating a multiplexer using concurrent logic, it uses 'WHEN ELSE' which translates directly into gates. When you are working with a databus (e.g., 64 bits), make sure bits arrive simultaneously. For example, if the path is longer for a particular bit, this could lead to a race condition, which means data is not valid when it arrives at a device (bad timing). When implementing an if-statement in VHDL, make sure you choose the right construct and approach, otherwise, you may have synthesized the hardware with something other than what you expected. If you see an explosion of gates in your synthesized hardware, double-check your approach. In summary, Sequential VHDL code is executed line by line. Sequential circuits use memory elements (registers) to store the internal state of the circuit. Sequential circuit output depends on the circuit’s inputs and internal states. It is similar to a WHEN/ELSE' statement, where the IF statement incorporates priority-encoded logic. It shows that the expressions of an 'IF' statement are evaluated successively, with higher priority given to the earlier expressions. When using a process to describe a combinational circuit, you need to include all the inputs in the sensitivity list. Also, the options of a 'CASE' statement must be mutually exclusive, and all possible values of the control\_expression must be included in the set of options.
